## System requirements

The following hardware is required to run Webots:

- A fairly recent PC or Macintosh computer with at least a 2 GHz dual core CPU
clock speed and 2 GB of RAM is a minimum requirement. A quad-core CPU is however
recommended.
- An nVidia or AMD (formerly ATI) OpenGL (minimum version 2.1) capable graphics
adapter with at least 512 MB of RAM is required. We do not recommend any other
graphics adapters, including Intel graphics adapters, as they often lack a good
OpenGL support which may cause 3D rendering problems and application crashes.
Nevertheless, in some cases, the installation of the latest Intel graphics
driver can fix such problems and let you use Webots. However, we don't provide
any guarantee on this. For Linux systems, we recommend only nVidia graphics
cards. Webots works well on all the graphics cards included in fairly recent
Apple computers. It is strongly advised to try the 30 day trial version of
Webots on your computer systems to ensure they are compatible before you buy.

The following operating systems are supported:

- Linux: Webots is ensured to run on the latest Ubuntu Long Term Support (LTS)
release, currently version 16.04. But it is also known to run on most recent
major Linux distributions, including RedHat, Mandrake, Debian, Gentoo, SuSE, and
Slackware. We recommend using a recent version of Linux. Webots is provided for
Linux 64 (x86-64) systems. Since Webots 8.1.0, the Linux 32 (i386) version is no
longer provided. Webots doesn't run on Ubuntu version earlier than 12.04.
- Windows: Webots runs on Windows 10 64-bit, Windows 8.1 64-bit, Windows 8 64-bit
and Windows 7 64-bit. It is not supported on 32-bit versions of Windows and on
old versions including Windows Vista, XP, NT4 or 2000.
- Macintosh: Webots runs on Mac OS X 10.11 "El Capitan" and 10.10 "Yosemite".
Webots may work but is not officially supported on earlier versions of Mac OS X.
Since version 6.3.0, Webots is compiled exclusively for Intel Macs, it does not
run on old PowerPC Macs. To use Webots on a PowerPC Mac, you need Webots 6.2.4
(or earlier), these older versions were compiled as *Universal Binary*.

Other versions of Webots for other UNIX systems (Solaris, Linux PPC, Irix) may
be available upon request.
