## The 3D Window

### Selecting an object

A single mouse click allows to select a solid object. The bounding object of a
selected solid is represented by white lines. These lines turn rose if the solid
is colliding with another one and blue when the solid is idle, i.e., it comes to
rest and it doesn't interact with any other active solid. Selecting a robot
enables the `Show Robot Window` item in the `Tools` menu. Double-clicking on a
solid object opens the Robot Window and if it was closed, the Scene Tree.

If an object has a solid subpart, then it is also possible to select only this
subpart by clicking on it once the whole object is already selected, or by
clicking on it while holding down the Alt key. Linux users should also hold down
the Control key (Ctrl) together with the Alt key.

### Navigation in the scene

Dragging the mouse while pressing a mouse button moves the camera of the 3D
window.

- *Camera rotation*: In the 3D window, press the left button and drag the mouse to
select an object and rotate the viewpoint about it. If no object is selected,
the camera rotates about the origin of the world coordinate system.
- *Camera translation*: In the 3D window, press the right button and drag the
mouse to translate the camera with the mouse motion.
- *Zooming / Camera rotation*: In the 3D window, press both left and right mouse
buttons simultaneously (or just the middle button) and drag the mouse
vertically, to zoom in and out. Dragging the mouse horizontally will rotate the
camera about the viewing axis. Alternatively, the mouse wheel alone can also be
used for zooming.

> **note**:
If you are a Mac user with a single button mouse, hold the Alt key and press the
mouse button to translate the camera according to the mouse motion. Hold the
control key (Ctrl) down and press the mouse button to zoom / rotate the camera
with the mouse motion.

### Moving a solid object

Currently Webots provides two different ways to move solid objects: axis-aligned
handles and keyboard shortcuts.

#### Axis-aligned handles

When a solid object is selected, some arrow-shaped handles appear in the 3D
window (see [this figure](#axis-aligned-handles-to-move-solid-objects)). These
handles can be used to translate and rotate the object along the corresponding
axis. For moving the object you can simply click on the handle and drag it to
the desired position. A label will show the currect relative translation or
rotation during the movement, as shown in [this
figure](#labels-displaying-relative-translation-and-rotation-when-moving-objects-with-handles).

If the Control key (Ctrl), the handles for resizing the solid object will be
displayed instead of translation and rotation handles. These resize handles can
also be enabled from the Field Editor.

%figure "Axis-aligned handles to move solid objects"

![manipulators.png](images/manipulators.png)

%end

%figure "Labels displaying relative translation and rotation when moving objects with handles"

![manipulators_label.png](images/manipulators_label.png)

%end

#### Translation using keyboard shurtcuts

- *Translation*: To move an object parallel to the ground: hold down the shift
key, press the left mouse button and drag.
- *Lift*: To raise or lower and object: hold down the Shift key, press both left
and right mouse buttons (or the middle button) and drag. Alternatively, the
mouse wheel combined with the Shift key can also be used.

> **note**:
If you are a Mac user with a single button mouse, hold the Shift key and the
Control key (Ctrl) down and press the mouse button to rotate the selected object
according to mouse motion. Hold the Shift key and the Command key (key with
Apple symbol) down and press the mouse button to lift the selected object
according to mouse motion.

### Applying a force to a solid object with physics

To apply a force to an object, place the mouse pointer where the force will
apply, hold down the Alt key and left mouse button together while dragging the
mouse. Linux users should also hold down the Control key (Ctrl) together with
the Alt key. This way your are drawing a 3D-vector whose end is located in the
plane parallel to the view which passes through the point of application. The
intensity of the applied force is directly proportional to the cube of the
length of this vector.

### Applying a torque to a solid object with physics

To apply a torque to an object, place the mouse pointer on it, hold down the Alt
key and right mouse button together while dragging the mouse. Linux users should
also hold down the Control key (Ctrl) together with the Alt key. Also, Mac OS X
users with a one-button mouse should hold down the Control key (Ctrl) to emulate
the right mouse button. This way your are drawing a 3D-vector with origin the
center of mass and whose end is located in the plane parallel to the view which
passes through this center. The object is prompted to turn around the vector
direction, the intensity of the applied torque being directly proportional to
the product of the mass by the length of the 3D-vector.

> **note**:
In pause mode, you can simultaneously add a force and a torque to the same
selected solid. Camera rotation can be useful when checking wether your force /
torque vector has the desired direction.

### Moving and resizing Overlays

By default for each Camera, Display and RangeFinder device, an overlay showing
the recorded or displayed image is visible in the 3D view. The device type is
indicated by the border color: magenta for Camera devices, cyan for Display
devices and yellow for RangeFinder devices, see [this
figure](#camera-display-and-rangefinder-overlays). This overlay can be moved to
the desired position on the view by clicking on it and dragging the mouse. In
order to resize the overlay the user has to click on the icon located at the
bottom right corner and drag the mouse, during this action the original not
scaled image size will be indicated using darker areas, as depicted in [this
figure](#camera-overlay-resizing) Additionally a close button is available on
the top right corner to hide the overlay. Once the robot is selected, it is also
possible to show or hide the overlay images from the `Camera Devices`, `Display
Devices` and `RangeFinder Devices` items in `Robot` menu.

%figure "Camera, Display and RangeFinder overlays"

![overlay.png](images/overlay.png)

%end

%figure "Camera overlay resizing"

![overlay_resize.png](images/overlay_resize.png)

%end

### Show Camera and Display images in separate window

Overlay images can also be displayed outside the 3D window, see [this
figure](#camera-and-display-image-window). When double-clicking with the left
mouse button on the overlay, a new external window displaying the device image
is created and the overlay in the 3D window is disabled. It is possible to
restore the 3D window overlay simply by closing the window.

%figure "Camera and Display image window"

![rendering_device_window.png](images/rendering_device_window.png)

%end

