## Using MATLAB

### Introduction to *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>

*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> is a numerical computing environment and an interpreted
programming language. *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> allows easy matrix manipulation,
plotting of functions and data, implementation of algorithms and creation of
user interfaces. You can get more information on the official
[MathWorks](http://www.mathworks.com) web site. *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> is widely
used in robotics in particular for its *Image Processing, Neural Networks* and
*Genetics Algorithms* toolboxes. Webots allows to directly use
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> scripts as robot controller programs for your simulations.
Using the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> interface, it becomes easy to visualize
controller or supervisor data, for example, processed images, sensor readings,
the performance of an optimization algorithm, etc., while the simulation is
running. In addition, it becomes possible to reuse your existing
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> code directly in Webots.

### How to run the Examples?

If *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> is already installed, you can directly launch one of
the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> examples. For doing that, start Webots and open the
world file "WEBOTS\_HOME/projects/languages/matlab/worlds/e-puck\_matlab.wbt" or
the world file "WEBOTS\_HOME/projects/robots/aldebaran/worlds/nao2\_matlab.wbt"
in your Webots installation directory. Webots automatically starts
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> when it detects an m-file in a controller directory. Note
that the m-file must be named after its directory in order to be identified as a
controller file by Webots. So, for example, if the directory is named
"my\_controller", then the controller m-file must be named
"my\_controller/my\_controller.m".

No special initialization code is necessary in the controller m-file. In fact
Webots calls an intermediate "launcher.m" file that sets up the Webots
controller environment and then calls the controller m-file. In particular the
"launcher.m" file loads the library for communicating with Webots and adds the
path to API m-files. The *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> API m-files are located in the
"lib/matlab" directory of Webots distribution. These are readable source files;
please report any problem, or possible improvement about these files.

### *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> Installation

In order to use *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> controllers in Webots, the
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> software must be installed (*The MathWorks*<sup>TM</sup>
license required).

Webots must be able to access the "matlab" executable (usually a script) in
order to run controller m-files. Webots looks for the *matlab* executable in
every directory of your *PATH* (or *Path* on Windows) environment variable. Note
that this is similar to calling `matlab` from a terminal (or *Command Prompt* on
Windows), therefore, if *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> can be started from a terminal
then it can also be started from Webots.

On Windows, the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> installer will normally add
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>'s bin directories to your *Path* environment variable, so
usually Webots will be able to locate *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> after a standard
installation. However, in case it does not work, please make sure that your
*Path* contains this directory (or something slightly different, according to
your *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> version):

```
Path=C:\Program Files\MATLAB\R2009b\bin
```

On Linux, the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> installer does normally suggest to add a
symlink to the "matlab" startup script in the "/usr/local/bin" directory. This
is a good option to make "matlab" globally accessible. Otherwise you can create
the link at anytime afterwards with this shell command (please change according
to your actual *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> installation directory and version):

```
$ sudo ln -s /usr/local/MATLAB/R2014a/bin/matlab /usr/local/bin/matlab
```

Similarly, on Mac OS X, if Webots is unable to find the "matlab" startup script
then you should add a symlink in "/usr/bin":

```
$ sudo ln -s /Applications/MATLAB_R2014a.app/bin/matlab /usr/bin/matlab
```

### Display information to Webots console

On Linux and Mac OS X, the Matlab output is redirected as is to the Webots
console. This means you can use all the Matlab display features (`disp()`,
`display()`, omitting the semicolon character at the end of a statement, etc.).

On Windows, the Matlab output is not redirected to the Webots console. The
`wb_console_print(text, stream)` function should be used to display some text in
the Webots console. The second argument (`stream`) can be either `WB_STDOUT` or
`WB_STDERR` depending on which stream you would like to write.

In order to create a cross-platform controller, it is recommended to use the
`wb_console_print(text, stream)` on every OS.

### Compatibility Issues

We recommend to use the latest Matlab version on an up-to-date operating system.

Note that 64-bit versions of Webots are not compatible with 32-bit versions of
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>. Webots comes only in 64-bit flavour and therefore it can
only inter-operate with a 64 bit version of *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>.

On some platform the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> interface needs `perl` and `gcc` to
be installed separately. These tools are required because
*MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>'s `loadlibrary()` function will need to recompile Webots
header files on the fly. According to *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup>'s documentation this
will be the case on 64-bit systems, and hence we advice 64-bit Webots users (on
Linux) to make sure that these packages are installed on their systems.

On some Mac OS X systems the *MATLAB*<sup>TM</sup> interface will work only if
you install the Xcode development environment, because `gcc` is required. An
error message like this one, is a symptom of the above described problem:

```
error using ==> calllib
Method was not found.

error in ==> launcher at 66
calllib('libController','wb_robot_init');
```

